# Finite State Machines

I am sure you may have heard of Finite State Machines in your Computer Science
classes. If you have no idea about that or you just need a refresher here it
goes,

Wikipedia defines FSM as:

> an abstract machine that can be in exactly one of a finite number of states at
> any given time. The FSM can change from one state to another in response to
> some external inputs; the change from one state to another is called a
> transition. An FSM is defined by a list of its states, its initial state, and
> the conditions for each transition.

There are 3 main pieces we can gather from this definition,

1. **Finite State**
2. **Events**: The external input that trigger a transition
3. **Transitions**: How the machine reacts to an event

A transition function is the most important part and that is what drives the
machine. It's definition looks like this:

```typescript
transition: (state, event) => nextState
```

Now this looks a whole lot like the reducers we write in React or Redux, with
one slight difference. Here `event` is being used in place of `action` because
actions in FSM mean an entirely different thing (effects) which we will get to
later.

> Fun fact: _reducer_ is actually a functional programming terminology that
> represents any pure function that takes the previous state and an action and
> returns the next state. Because of the same function signature and the fact
> that you could take a `collection of actions` and an `initial state` to get
> the final state, the reducers in redux are called, well, reducers. In case of
> our FSM, the transition function could take a `collection of events` and a
> `state` to produce a new state.

There is also one more important difference between how we write reducers in
react vs how the transition function will be built.

Typically, when we want to determine what the next state should be we tend to
decide that on the basis of the _event_. The finite state is an after thought.
Because of this we need to write excessive `if` statements and be defensive
while writing code in a way. I am sure we all have written code like this:

```javascript
// ❌ event first approach
switch (event.type) {
  case 'DATA_RECEIVED': {
    // ...

    // defensive programming
    if (state.isLoading) {
      // do something
    } else {
      // do something else
    }

    // ...
  }
}
```

In contrast, state machines group behaviour by _finite states_ and then narrow
down what happens next on the basis of the event received.

```javascript
// ✅ state first approach
switch (state.status) {
  case 'loading': {
    // narrow down on basis of event
    switch (event.type) {
      case 'DATA_RECEIVED': {
        // ...
      }
    }
  }
}
```

One of the main advantages that this approact provides is that if I dispatch an
event, the code for it executed only if I am in the right state. This ensures
that an event won't be improperly handled in a state that it shouldn't be
handled in. In other words, you prevent impossible states and impossible
transitions without having to litter your code with if-statements.

> Fun fact: Even the
> [redux style guide](https://redux.js.org/style-guide/style-guide/#treat-reducers-as-state-machines)
> advises us to treat reducers as state machines.

One other advantage is in terms of how we reason about this code:

In an event first approach it would sound like this:

> When data is received, do something, but only if the "loading" flag is true.

And with the state first approach:

> In the "loading" state, when data is received, do something.

Using nested switch statements, although fine, may feel verbose at times. A
simpler approach would be to use an object.

```javascript
const machine = {
  initial: 'loading',
  states: {
    loading: {
      on: {
        DATA_RECEIVED: {
          target: 'success',
        },
        // ... more events
      },
    },
    success: {
      // ...
    },
    // ... more states
  },
}
```

Using this determining the next state based on current state and the event is
just two key lookups:

```javascript
const transition = (state, event) => {
  const nextStateNode =
    // lookup the curren state
    // lookup the next state based on event
    machine.states[state.status].on?.[event.type] ?? {target: state.status} // if event is not handled, stay on current state

  return {
    ...state,
    status: nextStateNode.target,
  }
}

transition({status: 'loading'}, {type: 'DATA_RECEIVED'})
// => { status: 'success', ... }
```

The great thing about this object structure is that you can also specify what
actions to preform as a result of the transition.

```javascript
const machine = {
  initial: 'loading',
  states: {
    loading: {
      on: {
        DATA_RECEIVED: {
          target: 'success',
          // what actions/effects should happen as a result of this transition
          actions: [{type: 'saveData'}],
        },
        // ... more events
      },
    },
    success: {
      // ...
    },
    // ... more states
  },
}
```

due to the inclusion of actions, we will have to change our transition function
to incorporate that.

```javascript
const transition = (state, event) => {
  const nextStateNode = machine.states[state.status].on?.[event.type] ?? {
    target: state.status,
  }

  const nextState = {
    ...state,
    status: nextStateNode.target,
  }

  // preform the actions/effects specified
  nextStateNode?.actions.forEach(action => {
    if (action.type === 'saveData') {
      nextState.data = event.data
    }
  })

  return nextState
}
```

The machine we have created is actually the same object we would need to pass to
Xstate. You can visualize how the machine works by putting that object in the
[xstate visualizer](https://xstate.js.org/viz/) or just copy this:

```javascript
const fetchMachine = Machine({
  initial: 'loading',
  states: {
    loading: {
      on: {
        DATA_RECEIVED: {
          target: 'success',
          actions: [{type: 'saveData'}],
        },
      },
    },
    success: {},
  },
})
```
